Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it’s the
start of another three-part mini-series,
this time on animals throughout history.
In part one, today’s episode, we’ll
be talking about dogs, our canine
companions, man’s best friend.
Then in part two, we’ll talk about a very
different but equally important animal.
The cat.
And in part three it’ll be
the history of an animal that
didn’t exist at all: the dragon.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
In Homer’s epic book, the Odyssey, the
hero Odysseus spends ten long years
away from home fighting the Trojan War.
His ten-year journey back home is
equally hazardous, and he has to
evade cyclopes, giants, sorceresses,
and various gods who mean him harm.
In his absence, he is presumed dead,
and his wife and son are left to deal
with a group of men who have their eyes
set on Odysseus’ loyal wife, Penelope.
Odysseus does finally return home,
but he must do so in secret, fearful
that revealing his identity too
soon would put him in mortal danger.
So, he returns not in the clothes
of a triumphant king, but disguised
as a poor beggar clad in rags.
True to his plan, nobody
recognises their former king.
Not his servants, not his
wife, not even his son.
Or rather, no human recognises
their former master.
As Odysseus makes his way towards his
former palace, he comes across an old
dog lying on the side of the road.
The dog is lying in piles of
filth, and covered in fleas.
Odysseus recognises him as Argos,
his old faithful hunting dog.
Argos notices the beggar walking
past, drops his ears, lifts
his head and wags his tail.
It has been twenty years, and Argos
is old and dying, but the animal
recognises his master immediately.
He is too old and weak to get up, and
Odysseus knows that he cannot greet
him, lest his identity be revealed.
Odysseus, the great Greek warrior, is
forced to wipe the tears from his eyes.
The narrator tells us that as soon as
Odysseus sets foot in the palace, his
loyal dog, Argos, keels over and dies.
It’s one of the most memorable
scenes in the Odyssey, and a reminder
of how long and how deeply dogs
have been part of the human story.
Because Homer didn’t include
this scene to show us that
dogs are cute, or sentimental.
He included it because, even nearly
three thousand years ago, the idea
that a dog would recognise its human,
even after decades apart, already
felt completely natural, so natural
that it needed no explanation.
Compared to every other animal–cats,
horses, even your pet goldfish–the
lives of dogs and humans are
more closely intertwined.
So, to understand this connection,
to understand the history of dogs,
we first need to go back to a
time before dogs existed at all.
A time when humans were not
at the top of the food chain.
A time when the night was far
more dangerous than it is today.
Imagine, if you will, the world
thirty or forty thousand years ago.
This was the Pleistocene, an
era of ice and giant beasts.
Humans were nomadic
hunter-gatherers, moving across
the landscape in small groups.
By day, we were capable hunters,
but by night, we were vulnerable.
We had no walls, no lights, and we were
surrounded by predators who could see
in the dark much better than we could.
There were cave bears, large cats, and
various species of wolf–not the modern
grey wolf you might see in a documentary
today, but larger, now-extinct ancestors.
Now, for a long time, the
"standard" story of how wolves
became dogs was quite simple.
It went like this: a brave human
hunter found a litter of wolf
cubs, took one home, and raised it.
Over generations, these
"tame" wolves became dogs.
It’s a nice story, but most
modern scientists believe it
is almost certainly wrong.
Why?
Well, because a wild wolf, even one
raised by humans, is still a wild animal.
It's unpredictable, it is
aggressive, and it's very hard
to keep in a "domestic" setting.
Even if you raise a wolf puppy
with care and affection, when it
grows up, it becomes very clear
that it is still a wild animal.
Instead, the true story of
how some wolves became dogs is
likely one of self-domestication.
As humans moved across the
land, we left things behind:
specifically, scraps of food.
Leftovers.
For a hungry wolf, a human
campsite was a "buffet."
Most wolves were too afraid of humans
to get close, but a small number
of them were naturally a little
bit braver, a little bit "tamer."
These wolves realised that if they
stayed near humans, they didn't have
to hunt as hard, because breakfast
would be served automatically;
they could scavenge our leftovers.
Because they were better
fed, they had more puppies.
And because tameness is a genetic
trait, their puppies were even
braver and even friendlier.
Scientists call this the
"Survival of the Friendliest."
Over thousands of years, a
"partnership of convenience" formed.
These friendly wolves acted as a
natural alarm system, barking when
a dangerous predator approached
the camp at night, so humans were
happy to be followed by wolves.
And in return, they provided the
animals with a steady source of protein.
But friendliness alone doesn’t
explain why wolves became dogs.
Plenty of animals can
become tolerant of humans.
What makes dogs unusual, and what truly
separates them from wolves, is how
well they learned to understand humans.
Modern studies have shown
that dogs are remarkably good
at reading human behaviour.
They follow pointing gestures.
They look to humans for guidance
when faced with a problem.
In some experiments, dogs
outperform even chimpanzees at
understanding basic human cues.
And over time, dogs didn’t just
adapt to living near humans.
They adapted to living with humans.
They evolved to fit into our social world.
And as these animals changed their
behaviour, something fascinating
happened to their bodies.
This is known as Domestication Syndrome.
As we selected for "friendliness,"
other physical changes
followed, almost by accident.
Their snouts, their noses, became shorter.
Their teeth became smaller.
Their ears, which were previously
sharp and upright to catch the
sound of prey, began to flop over.
They even developed
"patches" of white fur.
And the changes weren't
just on the outside.
Inside their bodies, something
even more remarkable was happening.
Scientists have discovered that one of the
biggest genetic differences between a wolf
and a dog is the ability to digest starch,
the carbohydrate you get from eating
things like bread, rice and potatoes.
And as humans moved from hunting
to farming and started eating more
bread and grains, the dogs that
survived were the ones whose stomachs
adapted to eat our leftovers.
They literally evolved
to share our dinner.
And perhaps the most remarkable,
or most manipulative, of the
changes happened in their faces.
Dogs have a tiny muscle above their
eyes that wolves simply do not have.
It allows them to raise their
inner eyebrows to create what
we call "puppy dog eyes."
This expression mimics the look of a
human infant, a baby, which triggers
a nurturing response in our brains
and makes us want to protect them.
I love dogs, and if you are also a
dog person, then what I’m describing
doesn’t need any further explanation.
And even if you are more of a cat
person, it must be hard to look at a
puppy making “that face” and not feel
some sort of affection towards it.
Now, you might be wondering: how do
we know this "self-domestication"
actually happened?
Well, it's actually been put to the test
a lot more recently than 10,000 years ago.
In the 1950s, a Soviet
scientist named Dmitry Belyaev
decided to test this theory.
He took wild silver foxes and performed
a simple experiment: he only allowed
the "tamest" foxes—the ones that
didn’t try to bite him—to breed.
Curiously, within just a few generations,
the foxes didn’t just become friendly like
dogs; they also started to look like dogs.
Their ears began to flop,
their tails began to wag, and
their coats changed color.
This experiment proved that when you
select an animal for temperament—for
being "nice"—nature seems to throw
in these physical changes for free.
And as for dogs, there wasn’t
of course just one type of dog.
As humans moved into different
environments—from the frozen Arctic
to the hot deserts of the Middle
East—the dog adapted alongside us.
And to reiterate, it’s believed that
this was happening all over the world;
it wasn’t specific to one region.
What this meant was that we began to
see the very first "specialised" dogs,
dogs that were bred to do specific jobs.
Dogs bred for hunting,
with speed, stamina, and an
exceptional sense of smell.
Dogs bred to guard camps and later
settlements, alert to danger and
willing to defend their human group.
And, crucially, dogs bred to help
humans control other animals.
When we began to domesticate sheep,
goats, and cattle, dogs made this
possible on a much larger scale.
One person alone would
struggle to contain a herd.
But one person with a dog or with multiple
dogs is a different kettle of fish.
Herding dogs allowed humans to
manage livestock efficiently,
protect it from predators, and
move it across long distances.
And this mattered enormously.
Because livestock meant a
reliable source of food.
Reliable food meant surplus.
And surplus meant that humans no
longer needed to spend every waking
hour searching for their next meal.
This, in turn, allowed
settlements to grow.
Villages became towns.
Towns became cities.
And through all of this, dogs were
there, working alongside humans.
They hunted.
They guarded.
They herded.
They pulled sleds across frozen
landscapes where no other animals could.
In the Arctic, dogs made human life
possible in places that would otherwise
have been completely uninhabitable.
In deserts, they protected camps at night.
In forests, they tracked prey
invisible to the human eye.
Dogs didn’t just adapt
to human civilisation.
Human civilisation adapted with dogs.
And for most of history, it was
a working partnership, of course.
There was surely affection, as you
can see in the Odyssey, but the dog’s
primary function was as a worker, not
as someone to lie around you next to
your feet and get its tummy tickled.
And often, the partnership was
neither gentle nor sentimental.
Dogs were used in warfare.
The Assyrians, the Romans, and
later medieval armies all used
large dogs to intimidate enemies,
guard camps, and even fight.
In many societies, powerful dogs became
symbols of status and authority, owned
only by elites, kings and queens.
But even here, the pattern is the same.
Dogs amplified human ability.
They made humans more effective,
more mobile, and more secure.
A dog would be undyingly loyal
to his master, but he could
be vicious if ordered to be.
However, it's perhaps a simplification
to assume that dogs in the past were
only valued for their "utility".
In 1914, German archaeologists found
a grave that dates back 14,000 years,
to a time when you might have thought
dogs had a purely functional purpose.
Inside were a man, a woman, and a dog.
But here is the interesting part:
scientists analysed the dog’s teeth
and found that it had been very
sick for a long time before it died.
This dog could not have hunted.
It could not have guarded the camp.
It was "useless" in a survival sense.
Yet, the humans had kept it alive,
feeding it and cleaning it for months.
This is clear evidence us that the
emotional bond we saw with Argos in the
Odyssey wasn't some kind of new invention;
it was already thousands of years old.
Dogs might have been primarily workers,
but even going back tens of thousands
of years, humans clearly weren’t
able to resist those puppy dog eyes
or the loyal affection of a canine
companion any more than we are today.
Still, there are some examples of humans
keeping dogs as pets, like we do today,
but this was typically a luxury reserved
for those at the very top of society.
If you are a keen student of British
history, or you listened to episode
187 and have a fantastic memory,
you may remember the last moments
of the life of Mary Queen of Scots.
She was beheaded on the
orders of Queen Elizabeth.
So the story goes, after the executioner
struck, a little dog scuttled out
from under her petticoats and refused
to leave her body, lying between
her severed head and shoulders.
The poor thing was covered in her
blood and had to be forcibly removed.
It’s a grisly tale, but yet
another reminder of the longevity
of this human-canine bond.
Now, over time, as societies changed,
the role of dogs began to change too.
With industrialisation, urbanisation,
and modern weapons, humans
relied less on dogs for survival.
Most dogs lost their “jobs”, but in
what we might perhaps call an early
form of universal basic canine income,
dogs moved from the field into the home.
From tools to companions.
With their roles redundant, they were
allowed to put their paws up and relax.
In the 19th century, particularly in
Europe, and most markedly in Victorian
England, dogs were increasingly
kept purely for companionship.
Dogs were no longer workers;
they were family members.
They were given names.
They slept indoors.
They were mourned when they died.
But the Victorians didn't just
move dogs into the living room;
they fundamentally redesigned them.
Before the 1800s, 'breeds' were
loose categories based on jobs.
But in 1873, the first Kennel
Club was founded in London.
Humans began to write 'breed
standards–strict rules on exactly
how a dog’s tail should curl
or how long its nose should be.
By closing the 'gene pool' and only
allowing 'purebreds' to mate, we created
the incredible physical variety we see
today—from the tiny Chihuahua to the
massive Great Dane—this was created
all in just a few human generations.
And the trend of dog
ownership only accelerated.
What began in Victorian drawing rooms
spread across the industrialised
world throughout the 20th century.
As countries industrialised and grew
wealthier, particularly after World
War II, more and more people had the
disposable income to keep an animal
that served no practical purpose.
And what had once been a
luxury of the Victorian upper
classes became a global norm.
For most of human history, keeping a dog
that did no work at all would have seemed
not just unusual, but irresponsible.
But by the 1960s and 70s, in countries
across Europe, North America,
and parts of Asia, the "pet dog"
had become normal, even expected.
A home wasn't quite complete without one.
And today, well, dog ownership is huge.
Sure, there are still some countries and
societies where dogs are not popular,
whether that’s for religious or societal
reasons, but these are a minority.
Globally around 30% of
households have a dog.
People spend thousands of Euros on
their dogs, and according to one
report, spending on pets is scheduled
to reach $500 billion per year by 2030.
Yes, that includes other animals too, but
dogs are the world’s most popular pet,
and get the lion’s share of the spend.
If you have a dog, you probably
need no reminder as to why.
Odysseus knew it 3,000 years ago, the
Victorians knew it 150 years ago, and
there is certainly a good reason that
almost every language has some variant
on the phrase “man’s best friend”.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on dogs, our faithful, canine
partners for tens of thousands of years.
As a reminder, this was part
one of a three-part mini-series
on the theme of animals.
Next up we have an animal I must confess
I don’t enjoy the company of as much
as I do dogs, and that is the cat.
And in part three, it’ll be the
fire-breathing, mythical world of dragons.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.